what's your thoughts on ADHD oh this is
a big topic and I'll probably get myself
in trouble here but there's something
fishy going on we can get to that near
ayal one of the world's leading experts
in procrastination named the prophet of
habit forming talking about how to keep
focused how to set the right goals this
is a must listen avoiding distraction is
the key to not living with regret 90 of
the time that we get distracted it's not
because of what's happening outside of
us it's because of what's Happening
inside of us if you can't sit with a
friend without looking at your phone
every three minutes it's not the phone
it's your inability to deal with the
discomfort of silence or boredom all
human behaviors driven by desire to
escape discomfort it's not hard to do
something you enjoy but it's how do I do
the stuff that I really don't feel like
doing it I found this technique
thousands of Studies have shown this to
be very effective if you don't master
that everything else becomes much more
difficult if not impossible so the first
step is the number of people being
diagnosed with ADHD has significantly
risen ADHD is a very real thing that can
be debilitating for people that suffer
with it ADHD is real but I have a lot of
concerns ten percent of children in the
United States are diagnosed with ADHD in
Europe it's one percent that's a big red
flag training a generation to believe
that Solutions come in pill bottles we
do not wait how dangerous those pills
can be they have consequences the whole
chemical and balance Theory no
psychiatrist will tell you that's true
skills before pills and what I hate
about a lot of people in the ADHD
Community they feel like it's an
identity and that is so dangerous we
need to look at ADHD as
would you like to go for dinner with me
and my guests here on the Diary of a CEO
we are holding dinner parties all around
the world over the coming months and our
subscribers on this YouTube channel are
invited we're inviting 20 subscribers to
every dinner so if you'd like to come
for dinner with me and my guests here on
the Diary of a CEO I have a favor to ask
you all you've got to do is hit the
Subscribe button and I hope to see you
at dinner somewhere around the world
very soon
foreign
[Music]
it is very good to see you again because
I have to admit you've changed my life
but you also changed my father's life
you're the reason my father quit smoking
I've told this story maybe once or twice
before but once upon a time I came home
from for Christmas and I left your first
book hooked
in his bathroom he picked that book up
once I'd left read it understood habit
loops and from that moment he took steps
which led him to quit smoking so I have
to say thank you but also you've been on
this podcast once before a long long
time ago when not many people were
listening and from that conversation
there were small nuggets which have
stayed with me every day since my first
question to you Nia for people that have
just clicked onto this podcast and that
are thinking about whether to listen or
not can you tell me
who should listen
why they should listen
and yeah what value they're going to
gain from listening to the conversation
we're about to have yeah so first of all
thank you for having me it's an honor be
back for the second episode I think the
reason to listen is because regret sucks
having regret in your life is awful and
so what I want to minimize with the work
I do and frankly I write for myself more
than anyone else I try and solve my own
problems is I don't want to look back on
my life with regret not for a day not
for a month not for a a year not for a
lifetime certainly and so avoiding
distraction is the key to not living
with regret because we all basically
know what to do right we know we should
exercise we know we should eat right we
know we should spend quality time with
our family we know we should do the hard
work that we have to do to move our
careers forward
but many times we don't do it even
though we know what to do and if you
don't know what to do Google it it's all
out there right so the problem is not
that we don't know what to do the
problem is we keep getting in our own
way and so it's really about becoming
indistractible this is how we live the
kind of Lies we deserve
you described becoming indestructible on
Twitter as the single most important
skill that anybody in the 21st century
can adopt and learn
yeah and I think it's the macro skill
right because there's no facet of your
life that is not affected by your
ability to control your attention
so whether it's learning a new skill
whether it's getting into relationships
whether it's business whether it's
physical fitness all of these things
depend on your ability to follow through
and so that's why I think it's a skill
the century that if you if you don't
master that skill everything else
becomes much more difficult if not
impossible but if you do if you can
become indistractable you know I made up
the word indestructible it's meant to
sound like indestructible it's meant to
be a superpower it's meant to be a a
trait that we want in order to achieve
our dreams and so it you know my goal
was not to tell people what to do right
I'm not going to say you need to
exercise you need to live right you need
to do this you need to do that that's
not my goal at all if you want to play
video games uh for your waking hours
that's fine with me what I want to help
people do is do the things that they
themselves want to do whatever it is
that you say you want to do with your
time and attention that's what I want to
help you do
so why
don't we do what we want to do because
as you say The information's All Out
There we have Google we have all of
these books we have podcasts like this
but regardless of you know we've had
loads of Health podcasts in a row on on
this show where we've had the best
health experts from all around the world
and I'm sure there's people that have
listened to those episodes
have heard don't eat sugar don't do this
don't do this do this do this do this
right but they're still at home
struggling now to turn that intention
into Behavior what is standing in our
way what's getting in our way yeah so I
wish I could give you a one sentence
answer but let me back up and and kind
of frame this a bit so the best way to
understand what distraction is is to
understand what distraction is not and
to do that we have to start with what
the where the word comes from so the
word distraction comes from this Latin
root trahara which means to pull
and if you notice that the the the
opposite of of distraction is not focus
many people say I don't want to be
distracted I want to be focused but
that's not the opposite of the word the
opposite of distraction is traction that
both words end in the same six letters a
c t i o n that spells action reminding
us that distraction is not something
that happens to us it is an action we
ourselves take so we have traction we
have distraction
traction is any action that pulls us
towards what we say we're going to do
things that move us closer to our values
help us become the kind of person we
want to become those are acts of
traction the opposite of traction
distraction is any action that pulls us
away from what we plan to do farther
from our goals farther from becoming the
person we want to become so this is
really important this isn't just
semantics because I would argue that any
action that you do with intent anything
that is planned ahead anything that
involves forethought is traction so
there's a lot of talk today about how
you know social media is melting our
brains and video games are bad for you I
I don't I don't agree I think that
anything that you plan to do with your
time and attention as long as it's done
with intent is fine that becomes an act
of traction as long as it's planned for
with intent as Dorothy Parker said the
time you plan to waste is not wasted
time now just because something is a
work related test doesn't mean it's not
a distraction in fact that's the worst
kind of distraction because these
distractions trick you into not even
realizing you're getting distracted I'll
give you a perfect example for years I
would sit down on my desk I would
take out my to-do list by the way we can
talk about later why to-do lists are one
of the worst things you can do for your
personal productivity we can get to that
I would sit down on my desk and I would
say okay I've got that big project that
I need to work on right now nothing's
going to get in my way I'm going to stay
focused here I go I'm going to get
started
but first let me check some email right
let me just scroll that slack Channel
let me just do that uh one thing on my
to-do list that easy task just to get
started here just to get the rhythm
going right I'm you know it's a work
related task and what I didn't realize
that that is the most pernicious form of
distraction the distraction that you
don't even realize is happening because
if it's not what you said you were going
to do in advance within your time and
attention it is by definition a
distraction
right so what we tend to do is we
prioritize the easy work we prioritize
the Urgent work as opposed to the hard
and important work we have to do to move
our lives and careers forward so just
because the work related test doesn't
mean it's a distraction that's the most
awful type of distractions not the video
games it's not the social media it's the
distractions we don't even know are
distracting us from what we said we
would do with our time so now we've got
traction we've got distraction
now the other two parts of the model
involve what we call triggers triggers
are these things that prompt us to
action we have two kinds of triggers
external triggers are things in our
outside environment these are things
that we tend to blame like cell phones
and uh our computers and all the pings
dings and rings in our life but studies
find that those account for only 10 of
our distractions only 10 percent are
caused by these external triggers so
what's the other ninety percent ninety
percent of the time that we get
distracted it's not because of what's
happening outside of us it's because of
what's Happening inside of us these are
called internal triggers internal
triggers are these uncomfortable
emotional states that we seek to escape
and so that's the first step to becoming
instructable and answers your question
around Why by and large even though
despite knowing what to do we don't do
it it's because all of these problems
are an emotion regulation problem that
in fact time management is pain
management I would argue weight
management is pain management money
management is pain management in fact
all human behavior all human behavior is
about a desire to escape discomfort and
that answers your question around why
don't we just do what we say we're going
to do it's because we don't realize that
these are always
emotion regulation problems so that's
the first step to becoming
indistractible is mastering the internal
triggers then the second step we talked
about traction earlier making time for
traction the third step hacking back the
external triggers and then finally
preventing distraction with pacts and so
that's that's the model these four steps
and then of course we can go in as much
depth as you like but if you understand
these four fundamental steps and this is
what took me five years writing this
book namely because I kept getting
distracted right I was very distracted
with myself and I wrote the book for me
as I mentioned earlier uh but it was
when I boiled down the the you know
hundreds of studies and research and you
can see there's 35 five pages of
citations in the book uh it wasn't until
I I could kind of solidify this model
that I could make it practical enough to
change lives it certainly did mine
one of the things this podcast has
taught me from speaking to all these
people across multiple Fields is that
sometimes we can feel like our body our
wiring is against us especially as it
relates to health right so you know we
know sugar is bad so why does our brain
send us these Cravings to go and eat
sugar
and in the case of distractions and sort
of Behavioral psychology I know
instinctively and intuitively that
distractions like hanging out on Tick
Tock for an hour is bad
but my brain is doing it
what does that tell us about how we
should go about adopting Behavior change
yeah so that's why it's really about
this holistic model so that's what took
me the most time to figure out was what
are the four mandatory components of
living without regret of of doing what
you say you're going to do so the first
step is mastering these internal
triggers figuring out why you feel this
way right what is that underlying
sensation so if you're trying to avoid
that that chocolate bar well it might be
hunger or it might not be hunger right
so I used to be clinically obese and
I'll tell you what I did not eat uh to
excess because I was hungry I was eating
to excess because I was lonely I was
eating to excess because I was bored I
was eating too excess because I felt
guilty about how much I had just eaten
it wasn't just about The Hunger right
very few people who are obese are just
hungry all the time that's not what's
going on it's because we're eating our
feelings that's what's happening so
that's the first step we have to
understand the deeper reason how did you
understand that
um a lot of work a lot of uh figuring
out stuff in my life to to help me
understand that I think actually that's
where my fascination with what I do
today in terms of it's the same exact
reason that we would overdo uh our use
of Technology it's it's not the
Technology's fault guys I hate to tell
you this I wish I could blame Zuckerberg
and Tick Tock but these are just tools
right and then before those there were
other tools it was they used to call our
generation couch potatoes and before
that it was the radio was the moral
panic and before that it was comic books
there's always some moral Panic around
oh this is melting our brains because we
don't want to face the facts that we are
looking for escape from
these internal triggers right time
management is pain management all human
behaviors driven by desire to escape
discomfort so when you realize that that
you know what I was just unable to deal
with these Sensations in a in a
healthful way that moved me towards
traction I was trying to escape them
with distraction
it's not until you understand what
Sensations you're trying to escape from
that you can deal with them if you can't
sit around the table with a friend
without looking at your phone every
three minutes
it's not the phone it's your inability
to deal with the discomfort of maybe
having silence or boredom or whatever
else is going on your life so that has
to be the first step it's not the only
step but that's the first step I'm
really compelled by really interested in
how you figured out the thing you were
trying to escape from because I think
that's the starting point which is a
very difficult starting point for most
people they can see the sort of
compulsive Behavior that's maybe making
them live outside of their values or
causing them to excessively eat or
excessively watch porn or whatever it
might be but diagnosing the root cause
of that is a difficult thing to do most
of us don't know what we don't know and
yeah yeah it is and it isn't it I mean
I'm not you don't have to go to therapy
not there's anything wrong with it if
it's helpful please do it but that's not
a requirement it's something as simple
as you know so whenever I work uh I have
on my desk I have a little Post-It note
and a pen handy and when I get
distracted or when I even feel the sense
of distraction just noting now down that
sensation and just writing down what is
it that I felt right before the
distraction so I write every day and all
I want to do when I write you know this
right when you write all you want to do
is go Google something or do some
research or go check email for a quick
sec or let me just find that one thing
that might be and they're all
distractions they're all taking you away
from the core thing you need to do which
you said you would do which is right and
so if I can just pause for a second and
reflect on what was that Sensation that
I was feeling right before it was
boredom it was anxiety it was
fearfulness it was uncertainty just
writing it down is an incredible first
step towards gaining power over that
discomfort because then you can start to
identify it and so what I'll do many
times is just pause to reflect on wait a
minute what's going on there right what
what is that sensation because then you
can begin to do what's called reframing
the trigger so now when I feel the
sensation of wanting to get distracted I
say you know what what's going on here
okay I I'm feeling the sensation because
I'm stressed why am I stressed because
this is really important to me I want to
get this right for my readers and for
myself
and so reframing it as not a negative
but something that happens uh not to me
but for me that that sensation is a sign
that I can listen to I think most of us
we think when we feel this discomfort
that's happening to us right but it's
not it's happening for us it's a signal
for us to listen to now how we interpret
it is up to us and that's where the
magic happens if you interpret it as
something that is harmful is dangerous
that you need to Escape right you don't
want to feel that uncomfortable
sensation you look for distraction but
what we find is that high performers
across every field when you think about
the Arts when you think about sports
business High performers when they feel
those internal triggers they experience
the same internal triggers the rest of
us do they experience loneliness and
Stress and Anxiety just like everyone
else does
but they deal with it by using it as
Rocket Fuel to push them towards
traction whereas distractible people as
soon as they feel that discomfort they
try and Escape it with distraction
that's the big difference
that's one of the things that you said
to me when we spoke last time that
really has had a profound impact on my
life specifically around the area of
procrastination you said about that
which is like taking a moment to pause
and ask yourself what the which
psychological discomfort you're trying
to escape from in the moment and then
that second step so you now I'm clear
I'm trying not to do this book because
this particular chapter I just don't
feel that competent on I don't feel like
I've researched it it's making my brain
feel a bit hot thinking about it I
reframe it and go okay so I've I've
understood it now then what do I do yeah
so Step One is understand it is yeah is
is under master those internal triggers
yeah or they become your master yeah
that's step number one there's a bunch
of techniques we're just covering the
surfaces over a dozen different
techniques that you can use to help you
master those internal triggers now the
second step is to make time for traction
okay so when you have those doubts one
of these techniques that is is really
life-changing is scheduling time for
worry
scheduling time for worry
that what happens is in the moment we
feel these feelings we think these
thoughts and a distractible person will
say well I I gotta deal with that
sensation right now I have to I have to
work through whatever it is that I'm
feeling right now and they stop
everything to do that and that's not the
right method the right method is to
write down that sensation and get back
to the task at hand as quickly as
possible we're using these these four
strategies
then later on right now that you've
written down what that sensation is
you're going to make time in your
calendar
to think about that sensation
so you're processing it using the book
example I've hit chapter 12 and I just
I'm struggling with this chapter right
so so you step number one you had these
tools like let me maybe I can digress
for a second I'll tell you my favorite
tool for mastering internal triggers
it's called the 10 minute rule this
comes from acceptance and commitment
therapy and the 10-minute rule says that
you can give in to any distraction any
distraction maybe it's smoking that
cigarette if you're trying to quit maybe
it's eating that piece of chocolate cake
if you're on a diet maybe it's uh
checking social media whatever it is
whatever distraction you can give into
that distraction
but not right now you can give in in 10
minutes don't misunderstand not for 10
minutes sometimes people get it wrong
it's in 10 minutes okay so what does
that do what that does is we talk about
Psychological reactants earlier and you
asked how do you what do you do about
Psychological reactants you're allowing
yourself to acknowledge that you are in
control okay you decide what many people
do is they have strict abstinence right
strict evidence says no I will not do it
right I won't eat sugar I I won't get
distracted I will do this I will do that
as opposed to saying hey I'm an adult I
can do whatever I want I choose not to
go off track for the next 10 minutes
that's it in 10 minutes I can give in to
whatever I want so now I'm in control
you know the whole just say no technique
turns out makes you ruminate and think
about and have more discomfort around
the thing you want increasing these
internal triggers and that actually is
what makes you give in to that
distraction we know that with smoking
actually it's very interesting we're
finding that nicotine is less and less
part of the reason people get addicted
to cigarettes it's more about the
rumination around I I I want to smoke
but I can't I want to smoke but I
shouldn't I want to smoke I want to
smoke I want to smoke fine I'll finally
smoke now I get relief how do we know
this if you ask smokers why do they
smoke the number one reason it's
relaxing that makes no sense nicotine is
a stimulant
makes no sense right why would it be
relaxing it's relaxing because finally I
can stop telling myself I don't have to
do it anymore I don't have to fight with
myself anymore and that eases that
psychological reactance ha I can finally
give in so when you use this 10 minute
Rule and say okay I can give into that
distraction in 10 minutes from now what
you're doing is you're establishing
agency right now you're in control and
we can do anything for 10 minutes and if
10 minutes feels like too long try the
five minute rule the idea is that you're
building that ability over time so the
10 minute rule becomes a 12-minute rule
becomes a 15 minute Rule and you're
learning wait a minute I can't actually
delay gratification remember all these
problems of distraction are an impulse
control issue so when you teach yourself
wait a minute okay I can delay for five
ten minutes that's no big deal you're
proving to yourself hey I'm not addicted
to these things I'm not powerless my
brain isn't being hijacked I do have
control as long as I use these practices
right so the 10 minute rule is is a very
very effective technique now when you we
were talking about budgeting that time
later on okay so when you use those
techniques that's step number one by the
way there's a dozen other techniques
that you can use the 10-minute rules
just one of them later on in the day
you're going to put time in your
schedule to come back to that feeling
right I want you literally put time in
your calendar called worry time
and that's where you're going to look
back at that Post-It note and worry
about all the things that you thought
would that you thought you would
normally have to get to throughout your
day does that make sense so so uh I used
to do this all the time I would say oh
I've got this worry I need to work I
need to take care of that worry right
now
and that would derail me as opposed to
when I started writing down and planning
for that worry time you know what
happened nine out of ten of those
worries and emotions and fears and
thoughts
melted away
they when I when I had a few minutes to
think about them
you know what actually that wasn't that
important that didn't have to get done
that wasn't really a problem right and
the one out of ten that really was an
issue that I did need to think about
okay now I have time to actually think
about it so one it compartmentalizes
that time so it doesn't pull you away
and it lets your brain relax second
thing it does is that it lets your brain
say okay I don't have to worry about
this problem right now I can think about
it later we see this by the way with
with children you know many parents the
whole section in the book indistractible
on how to raise indistractible kids and
so many parents asked me about you know
what do I do with social media and this
and that and part of my advice is
schedule time for your kids to play
video games
put it in their daily schedule like sit
down with them and make a schedule for
the day and have that time because then
they don't have to worry about all day
when do I get to play fortnite when do I
get to you know hang out with my friends
online it's in their schedule it's
coming they don't have to think about it
all day long and so it's the same with
any of these potential distractions we
want to compartmentalize these times
when we can think about them later in
the day and work on them
so what happens then so I've
compartmentalized it I'm writing my book
I'm on chapter 12. I've got a bunch of
worries pop in I'm scheduling that for
later and I'm going to crack on with the
book right um that's what I say to
myself that's section two of your
four-step process right right making
time for traction so you're gonna finish
that time box yeah right so if you said
I'm gonna work on this book for 30
minutes
finish the time box even if you're just
sitting there staring into space right
Stephen pressfield talks about this and
the the uh the war of art it's about
putting your butt in the chair that's
what makes a professional is you do the
work right and what you find is it's
very boring for a few seconds I this
this happens every time I sit down to
write
there's that pause of you know what
maybe I'm just not feeling it maybe I
should just stop for a little bit
right you feel that all the time all the
time right if you just sit there if you
just stick with it even if it's just
putting your hands on the keyboard and
just hanging out for a few seconds
it always comes back right maybe a
minute or two or Twenty later it'll come
back and if it doesn't that's fine just
finish that time box that's the most
important thing
step three so step three is hacking back
the external triggers so this is when we
do talk about The Usual Suspects the
pings the dings the Rings uh that's
where we you know very systematically go
through what a lot of people complain
about but it's really only 10 the
problem because ninety percent of our
distractions begin from within but
people you know do have these issues we
talk about the the phone the computer
what turns out to be a much bigger
problem
is not the technology it's what the
technology is attached to
right so what if it's your boss that's
the distraction what if it's your kids
that are distraction we love them to
death right our kids are great but they
can be a huge source of distraction
meetings oh my God how many stupid
meetings do we have to attend that are
nothing but a distraction especially now
that Zoom makes it accessible so that
wherever you are you know people can can
call meetings those are huge
distractions of course uh slack channels
and that's what we get into more in the
book in terms of okay systematically
what do you do about these various
external triggers
what would you do about that and what's
your general view let's take this into
the professional context now you know
the design of like most offices the kind
of open plan format where everybody can
just walk over to someone else and say
oh Jenny if you've got a minute could
you just take a look at this yeah yeah
um the same applies in you know the
healthcare field and other sort of
scientific Fields where you're working
around a lot of people who can just tap
you on the shoulder and say could you
just take a look at this yeah can you
pass me the book yeah so every copy of
the book
comes with
oh did you tear it out already maybe oh
you've had this for a while so you've
toured out already so usually right here
in the back there is a piece of card
stock that
um you put is this red piece of card
stock that you fold in the thirds and
you put on your computer monitor and it
tells your colleagues I am
indistractible please come back later
and that screen sign is is a wonderful
way you know you put on your computer
monitor if you work in open floor plan
office that says hey I just need to be
indistractable for a little bit right
people say well why don't I just put on
headphones well people think you're
listening to an episode on YouTube or
something they don't realize that that
you're working with intent so that's one
easy way to do it another thing you can
do
is to start managing your manager and
this is something that that all of us
can start doing if we have you know
bosses who I hear this all the time says
look I'm indistractible I followed all
your techniques but my boss keeps
interrupting me what do I do so one of
the things you can do one of the
benefits of of step two there where you
can uh make time for traction is when
you have a time box calendar
you have an artifact you have something
that you can physically print out and
show to other people
so what I want folks to do when they say
look my boss isn't leaving me alone when
I need to work with that distraction
what do I do what you want to do is you
want to sit down with your boss for 10
15 minutes you say boss hey can we sit
down for 15 minutes on on Monday morning
I want to ask you something you sit down
with them and you show them your time
box calendar you take out the calendar
for your working hours and you say hey
boss okay here's what I'm doing this
week see here's my time for this meeting
here's my time for email here's my
focused work time here's what I'm doing
this week here's the various projects
you asked me to work on now you see this
other piece of paper here this is where
I wrote down all the things that you
asked me to do that I'm having trouble
fitting into my schedule
and what you're doing with this process
is you're avoiding one of the worst
pieces of productivity advice that we
hear all the time which is if you want
to be more productive you have to learn
how to say no
that is the kind of advice that only a
tenured professor would tell you that is
terrible advice you're going to tell the
person who pays your bills no you're
going to get fired that's awful advice
instead of saying no what you want to do
is to engage your boss in helping you do
the one thing that they absolutely have
to do as a manager which is prioritize
so you ask them how can I make sure that
I do what you ask me to do based on my
schedule for the week and here's what
they're going to do they're going to
look at them and say you know what that
meeting that's actually not that
important but that this project over
here that you put on the piece that's
actually super important can you swap
those out and so by doing that you're
doing what's called schedule syncing
you're making sure that their priorities
are also reflected in your schedule and
bosses will worship the ground you walk
on they love this because every boss out
there every manager we're wondering kind
of what our people are doing right
that's what they want to know but they
don't want to ask you that because they
don't want you to feel like you're being
micromanaged so you're proactively doing
that for them and you're showing them
hey this is the time when I need to do
focused work this is what I'm going to
be indistractible on that point of
priorities you said that startup
Founders really only have one job which
is to prioritize and that really did
smack me in the face because that's so
unbelievably true um we have a finite
amount of resources Founders
um we have a lot of things we want to do
we have more things we want to do than
time and time in the day and creating
systems like you said where we can sit
down and reflect on our priorities it's
so important because
we might have an idea every day then we
get to one month later and there's an
our to-do list or our teams are overcome
by doing the First Things We Said not
the most important things we've said
exactly and a lot of the time because I
don't know cognitive dissonance or Pride
or ego whatever you don't want to throw
something out that a people have started
working on or
um that you've you've told them to work
on but going up to your team and saying
okay we're just going to cancel that
project we've just spent two weeks
working on because this is a new
priority of ours
sometimes um sometimes can feel
difficult absolutely it's called the
commitment bias that when we commit to
something or some cost fallacy it's also
called that that when we have a sunk
cost in something we value it more but
of course that's that's silly especially
in business I mean this is
you know I had a professor in uh at
business school who said
um every business dies for the same
reason businesses only die for one
reason
cash they run out of cash cash is oxygen
oxygen is life
and the number one cause of a business
running out of cash is doing the wrong
thing for too long
so being able to cut your losses and
saying I know it feels wrong but I know
it's right in my head
that is an essential skill of every CEO
because again you know prioritization is
your only job and good prior priorities
people who are good at prioritization
make for good CEOs and people who are
bad at prioritization make for bad CEOs
so we're in step three of the four steps
what's step number four so step four is
is preventing distraction with pacts
so pact are these what's called a
pre-commitment device so this is what
you do after the first three steps so
you master the internal triggers you
make time for traction you hack back the
external triggers as the last line of
defense as the firewall against
distraction you're going to prevent
distraction with a pack now what are
packs it's when you decide in advance
what you will do to keep yourself in
that task and there's three types of
packs we have we call effort packs price
packs and identity pacts uh an effort
pact is when there's some bit of
friction in between you and the thing
you don't want to do so I'll it's just
us and your millions of viewers here so
I'll get a little personal okay
um a few years ago my wife and I and
again we've been married for 22 years
now a few years ago before I was writing
this book
uh we noticed that our sex life was
suffering that every night we were going
to bed
and I was fondling my iPhone and she was
caressing her iPad and me both right and
we were going to bed later and later and
not only were we not getting proper
sleep we all know how important rest is
our sex life was suffering so when I
started this research I came across this
uh the the This research around
um the importance of these effort packs
and I went to the hardware store and I
bought us this 10 outlet timer now this
Outlet time where you plug into the wall
and whatever you plug into that outlet
timer will turn on or off at any time of
day and night so what did we do with
that we plugged in our internet router
into this timer
so every night in our household at 10 pm
the internet shuts off now could I turn
it back on of course I could but I'd
have to go under my desk unplug this
timer reset it and plug it back in that
would take effort so I put some friction
in between myself and the distraction
okay and lo and behold every night we
all knew okay the internet's gonna shut
down at 10 pm finish up whatever you
need to do and it gave me that bit of
mindfulness to say okay do I really need
to still you know check email or social
media or whatever silly thing I was
doing or is it time to do what I said I
was going to do which is get some rest
go to bed and maybe be intimate with my
wife
people might hear that and go you didn't
need a timer to have sex with your wife
but I did I did because look in the
moment you know you're you're uh you're
tired you're uh you're you're just kind
of drifting off we've all done this
right where you you're looking at
something on the Internet the and it
just it's kind of harmless because you
know she's brushing her teeth and I'm
waiting and you know just one thing
leads to another and before you know it
it's you've gone to bed later than you
uh anticipated and you've given up a lot
in the process so having that rule again
having that time box calendar that's
that's step number two where you have to
we have in our calendars bedtime right
why do we do that do I know okay I'll
eventually I'm gonna go to sleep but why
do I have a bedtime in my calendar and
isn't it ironic for those of us who have
children we tell our children you need a
bedtime right we're adamant about how
our children need bad times but for us
we don't need a bedtime and my daughter
called us out on this and she said Daddy
what what's your bedtime
and she was absolutely right we've all
read these books we all know how
important sleep is and yet you know we
don't go to bed we we it's crazy to me
how many I see this with with multiple
domains and health and fitness we get uh
nootropics and we get blackout curtains
and we get you know oh wait melatonin
just go to bed on time that's the number
one reason people don't get enough sleep
they don't go to bed on time so did I
need an Internet timer yeah we all do
because this is what keeps us awake
right we do all these interesting things
again the price of progress is that you
can find anything you want at any time
of day or night on the internet so we do
need these packs again as the last line
of defense it's not the first thing you
know I don't want people to listen to me
and say okay fine I'll get an Internet
timer then I won't get distracted no if
you don't first deal with the the
internal triggers that lead you to
distraction you'll find something else
right someone's also going to say listen
you've got 4G internet on your phone
you've got cellular internet so you can
just go through again but now it's
effort yeah yeah right if if I really
wanted to lie to myself of course I
could that's not the point right yeah
that there's always a way the point is
it adds a bit of friction yeah yeah
right it's that bit of of uh effort that
now I have to take and more than
anything it's a statement you're making
to you and every and everyone in your
social environment that at 10 pm is the
shutoff time where the people adhere to
that as you say there's ways to
circumnavigate that right it's the
statement of having that shut off timer
exactly and now by the way we it
actually wouldn't even matter because we
all know the internet's going to shut
off at 10. we all need to start getting
ready to to stop doing whatever we're
doing because it's gonna now we don't
even need it anymore it's become part of
our nightly ritual right and by the way
what I want to illustrate is the concept
not the practice right tactics are what
you do strategy is why you do it that's
more important you know I think a lot of
these books around similar topics around
um you know dealing with with uh focus
and productivity it's a lot of life
hacks right but what I wanted was more
the the strategy the the psychological
principles around why we get distracted
and then I'll I'll let people come up
with their own tactics I give you lots
of tactics as well but this is just one
illustration of how we can use this
strategy and that's only one pack
there's also uh two other packs I can I
can share as well there's a lot of well
just before we get into the two other
packs um a lot of debate over the years
about this idea of willpower all of you
know just before we started recording I
said to you I looked up all these time
management techniques and I've looked at
these diet fads and there's so many of
them because it appears that they none
of them really work without this
underlying thing called discipline so
you can have all the you know I can time
books and I can the one two three four
technique and the abc5 technique
whatever but if I don't have the
underlying discipline then I'm not going
to do any of these things
um discipline is such a interesting word
it kind of catches a lot of different
things a lot of psychological forces
you've described
but and this other theory of willpower
that's sort of trundled On Through the
Ages that we have a limited amount of
willpower and if we try and do too many
things at once then we'll do none of
them and only take on one bad habit at
once is there any truth to all of that
stuff no
no no willpower is not a limited
resource
uh at least from the latest research you
know science is never conclusive but
from what we know today it seems so a
few years ago there was this concept
called ego depletion ego depletion
exactly what you mentioned it's that uh
we run out of willpower like someone
would run out of battery charge on their
phone right that it's a depletable
resource and this concept was was
promoted and kind of widely circulated
in the popular press uh and there was
some Fantastical claims made that if you
uh if you drank a sugar sweetened
lemonade that you would boost your
willpower and it turns out as often
happens in the social sciences when
something sounds a little fishy we
replicate the study we try and run the
study again and Carol dweck you might
know from she's probably been on your
show um from her book mindset she
decided to replicate these studies she
decided to run them again these ego
depletion studies and she found that the
only people who experienced ego
depletion the only people who actually
did run out of willpower like someone
would run out of battery on their phone
the only people who experience that were
people who believed that willpower was
limited resource
that's it
so it turns out I mean this is
incredibly important because it has
implications for all sorts of things in
our life right when we believe that we
are somehow deficient that our brain is
broken that uh uh the the world is
conspiring against us to hijack our
brains when we believe these
self-limiting thoughts
we act in accordance and so it's very
much the case with with this ego
depletion myth that ego is that our
willpower is not limited unless we
believe it is
and on this point of did because I think
the word discipline is somewhat
interchangeably used with like willpower
it's doing the thing you said you were
gonna do like and you intended to do I
was trying to figure out what discipline
is and where it comes from why in
certain aspects of my life like going to
the gym now so for the last three years
I've gone to the gym about six days a
week
um before then I couldn't DJing I've
started DJing and I've done that for
about 12 months I've been disciplined
with that this podcast I've been able to
do it we released two episodes a week
and we have done for a while now why am
I disciplined in some areas of my life
why can I continue to show up and why in
other areas of my life is it this kind
of failing battle to like you know get
back on the horse every other week
because I've fallen off I had a
hypothesis where I was like well with
DJing I have like a goal that means this
is maybe my discipline equation a goal
that means a lot to me it's worth the
pursuit if I attain it you know it feels
like it's worthwhile
plus the psychological engagement and
enjoyment of the pursuit of the goal so
like deep like I want to be a DJ
um plus the psychological engagement and
enjoyment I I love the process of DJing
it's like meditational therapy listening
to your favorite music for hours doing
nothing other than being in that flow
State minus
this is where you kind of come in I
guess is the psychological discomfort or
disengagement
associated with the pursuit so for
example if the DJing equipment was up in
the spare room and I had to
load it up every day and it took 35
minutes to do it
and then I had to load up the software
every day and it was really difficult
um I might find the process not
worthwhile and my discipline might Wane
when you look at that equation the why
the enjoyment of the pursuit minus the
the sort of unenjoyment of the pursuit
yeah does that make sense there's a lot
there I mean the basics are there I
think what's
uh Missing is that you if so with this
DJing uh Pursuit
you enjoy it and so it's not hard to do
something you enjoy this is my problem
with flow you've heard about me how
chick sent me high with the concept of
flow uh that you know you can get into
this state where time flies and it's
effortless and the examples if you read
the book uh that many of the examples
are from Sports they're from things that
you know people really enjoy doing
and that's you know that's like
Hollywood it's nice work if you can get
it how do you get into flow when it's
something you really don't want to do
so right now you enjoy DJing because to
correct me if I'm wrong it's it's you're
not doing professionally or maybe you
are not really no so my guess is right
now as an amateur it's fun Stakes are
low you're just enjoying the process
very much what I used to do when I first
started blogging right I was just
writing for myself and then I got a few
readers it was kind of fun just to you
know pure joy pure amateur Behavior and
then what
what happened uh when I said okay now I
want to publish a book or when you if
you decide to professionally DJ it's
gonna start getting hard right now
there's all this other stuff you don't
want to do around the core experience
right now you got to figure out how do I
build my brand and how do I get people
packed into you know the the uh my show
and all this stuff that you have to do
that maybe isn't as fun and that's where
flow falls down so this is exactly
what's happening and happened so I
started DJing and then we announced I'm
gonna do a show we've got three thousand
people to come to this venue
and in the lead up to that DJing became
a lot less fun right and even now so
they've they've they're trying to book
me to do a show in Ibiza and Marbella
this year and suddenly I'm getting all
uncomfortable about DJing again because
so when I look at the equation I
presented what seems to have happened in
that equation is the perceived
psychological cost has increased
suddenly because like nerves and yeah
yeah there's like worry and all these
other forces at play and that equations
now have killed and my discipline has
dropped right exactly exactly and so
that's where becoming indestructible
comes into play
you don't need to be indistractible for
something you love doing anyway right
there's no problem with that follow
through is easy it's how do I do the
stuff I know I need to do but I really
don't feel like doing it if you ask you
know we talked about earlier the only
reason businesses fail is because they
run out of cash the only reason we fail
out our goals it's only one the only
reason we fill out our goals because we
don't feel like it
I don't feel like it I don't feel like
going to the gym right now I don't feel
like working on that book I don't feel
like whatever it is it's a feeling
fundamentally it's a feeling of course
there's outside factors of course but in
terms of the number one reason we don't
pursue our goal is we quit right that's
the the most prominent reason we don't
follow through and that tends to be
because of a feeling so when there are
these tasks that suddenly get hard right
or suddenly difficult that's when we
need different tactics it's easy to do
the stuff we enjoy it's hard to do the
stuff that uh we don't enjoy
so what would you advise me to do then
in the case of DJing I've got you know
potentially two shows this summer in
Europe so I I would start with your
values
um and that's part of step two of making
time for traction when people ask you
know how do I make a time box calendar
where do you start you start with your
values
so what are values the definition of
values in my book is attributes of the
person you want to become
attributes of the person you want to
become
so then what you do is you put your your
values in terms of these three life
domains I look at them as concentric
circles at the center of these three
life domains is you if you can't take
care of yourself can't take care of
others you can't make the world a better
place
so in that when it comes to that life
domain you look at the things that you
want to do for yourself the time you
want to spend to become the person you
want to become and you look at your
calendar you look at this blank calendar
for the next seven days and you ask
yourself how would the person I want to
become spend their time
and you put that time in your schedule
so time for rest time for reading time
for uh video games doesn't matter put
that time in your schedule the next life
domain is your relationships part of the
reason we have this loneliness epidemic
in the industrialized world is that we
don't have the time scheduled for our
relationships like we used to as the
industrialized world became more secular
the church the synagogue the mosque we
don't go to these
social interactions where we care for
others and others care for us we don't
have that schedule in our day anymore
and I'm not saying it I'm pretty secular
myself I'm not saying we have to do that
but that is what we have lost because we
don't have these regular what used to be
religious institutions doesn't have to
be real I mean we Robert Putnam was
talking about this in the 1990s in his
book bowling alone we don't have these
regular social interactions like
previous generations did and we need to
bring those back I actually think social
media overuse is a symptom not the cause
of the fact that we don't see people
regularly so you need to put in your
calendar time for those relationships
your friends your family your kids uh
your significant others you have to put
that time in your schedule don't give
them whatever scraps of time are left
over put in your schedule then finally
your work domain this is where most
people start it's actually I think where
we need to end work comes in two flavors
we have what's called reactive work and
we have reflective work reactive work is
how a lot of people how distracted
people spend their days reacting to
messages reacting to notification
patients reacting to requests all day
long reacting to things and that's fine
everybody's job will involve some amount
of reactive work but if you're not
scheduling time for reflective work
you're going to run real fast in the
wrong direction you have to put time in
your schedule to think
if you want to do work that is creative
work that requires Focus you have to
schedule that time it's okay if it's
only 15 20 minutes but that time has to
be on your schedule so to answer your
question of okay well what do I do with
this this passion I have around DJing
it's a factor of how much time you want
to put into it based on your values
based on the kind of person you want to
become
so what would the Stephen you want to
become how much time
time first and foremost not outcome I
think that's the problem with a lot of
goal planning this is one of my beef
with uh with to-do lists to-do lists are
a series of outputs I want to do this I
want to do this I want to do this I want
to and it has no constraint
a to-do list has no constraints you can
always add more and so what happens you
come home with your to-do list of a
million things after you've worked
really hard all day long and most of
those things you have not crossed off so
what does that say to your self-image if
every day you come home and all these
things still haven't been done after a
long day of work and you haven't done
what you said you would do loser so day
after day week after week month after
month year after year you're reinforcing
the self-image of someone who doesn't do
what they said they're gonna do
right as opposed to a time box calendar
has constraints
same 24 hours in the day
right and I don't care if you're Jeff
Bezos or Elon Musk you can always make
more money you can't make more time I
think it's exactly flipped most people
are cheap with their money and generous
with their time I think it should be the
opposite right we should be cheap with
our time and generous with our money
because you can always make more money
you can always make more money you
cannot make more time so a time box
calendar forces you to work with
constraints and decide based on your
values how much time you can afford to
spend on whatever you want to do
right because if you put in everything
you you'll get nothing you'll live in
regret whereas if you say look I only
have four hours a week for DJing
Endeavors and here's where I'm going to
put that in because I also want to spend
time with my friends I need to take care
of myself I need to take care of my
business so it's not based on outcome
it's based on input right so if you went
to a baker okay and you said hey my kid
has a birthday party I need a two dozen
cupcakes
Baker's gonna say okay I need flour I
need sugar I need butter I need all
these inputs I need these ingredients to
make the output but when it comes to
knowledge work
we only think about the output but
what's our input our input is just two
things time and attention those are our
ingredients that's it so you can't just
think about the output you can't just
think about the cupcakes you have to
think about the input the input is time
and attention and that just like
ingredients for a cupcake has to be
budgeted for you have to plan that ahead
or it's not going to work out so I you
and my inspiration for starting time
blocking I've called it the time boxing
yeah same thing
um and it's really really been helpful
specifically in times when I'm not in
work so when I go away to write for
example and I don't have meetings that I
like I have to do that pop in and out
Etc it's been super helpful and also
I'll be honest during the pandemic was
when I really to the point that I
started developing a Time blocking app
with a friend of mine oh yeah because it
was that useful for me the pandemic had
happened we weren't meeting anybody we
weren't having sort of in-person
meetings so I had long days but that
felt a bit more empty than usual so to
sort of get a grasp on them and stop
them being whittled away with by
Distraction I started time blocking and
it was amazing for me I guess one of the
questions I want to ask before I get on
to this is do you even so I in my
personal relationship with my girlfriend
we've been together for about four years
um pretty much ever since we first met
me and you first met
um it's the first time I've lived with
someone she's moved in we live together
and one of the things that a busy
lifestyle
can do and I think you've described it
as well as it can have an impact on your
sex life and relationship dates date
night Etc
so I propose the idea to her
because of you
we should schedule these things because
I schedule everything else that's
important to me yeah so we should
schedule our date night and those kinds
of things right because that's equally
important to me too and she was a bit
resistant to the idea at first because
in in her rebuttal was that it kind of
takes the
you know this spontaneity and the spice
and the date night or scheduling sex
because some people schedule sex I don't
go that far I wouldn't do as far as
scheduling sex but it's really like
spending time together and doing stuff
she like her she was resistant to
scheduling it because she felt that it
took the you know the like
but the the so there's an interesting
concept okay so when I was um my wife
and I met at University and we met an
economics class and in this class they
discussed this concept of a residual
beneficiary a residual beneficiary in
business is the person the chump who
receives whatever's left over when a
business is sold so first debt holders
get their share then the equity holders
whatever's left over the residual
beneficiary gets right
and after we've been married for a few
years she sat me down she says near you
have turned me into the residual
beneficiary wow what a thing to say
right I get whatever scraps of time are
left over
if if you and your relationship by the
way my book is not for people who have a
perfect life okay I don't have a perfect
life I still get distracted from time to
time the difference is between a
distractible person an indistractable
person is that a distractible person
keeps getting distracted by the same
things Paula coila has a wonderful quote
he said a mistake repeated more than
once is a decision such a good quote a
mistake repeated more than once it's a
decision
good right so distractible people keep
getting distracted by the same things
again and again how many times we're
going to complain about Tick Tock and
Facebook before we say enough I'm gonna
do something about it right
indistractable people say okay I got
distracted once but you're not gonna let
it happen again and again so I'm gonna
take steps today to prevent getting
distracted tomorrow so when my wife and
I found that our schedules were getting
busier and busier and we weren't making
the proper time for each other it wasn't
happening spontaneously then we had to
go to plan B and plan B for a long time
the there was no plan it was just well
it's not happening the problem is
people interpret the fact
maybe you felt this that not making time
not being spontaneous means that we
don't love each other as much and I
think that's a huge mistake that's not
it at all it certain wasn't in my
relationship with my wife I still loved
her just as much just that I was busy
honey and there's this big thing
happening here and I need to do this I
need to do that and the time would slip
away and we wouldn't spend time together
that's no indication that I don't love
my wife it's an indication that I didn't
know how to prioritize my wife properly
so I stopped making her the residual
beneficiary if we have extra spontaneous
time you know sometimes uh a meeting is
canceled great let's let's do something
together
but at minimum we know on Friday nights
that's our date night
quick one as you guys know we're lucky
enough to have blue jeans by Verizon as
a sponsor of this podcast and for anyone
that doesn't know blue jeans is an
online video conferencing tool that
allows you to have slick fast high
quality online meetings without all the
glitches you might normally find with
online meeting tools and they have a new
feature called Blue Jeans basic blue
jeans basic is essentially a free
version of their top quality video
conferencing tool that means you get an
immersive video experience that is super
high quality super easy and super
basically zero fast apart from all the
incredible features like zero time
limits on meeting calls it also comes
with High Fidelity audio and video
including Dolby voice which is
incredibly useful they also have
Enterprise grade security so you can
collaborate with confidence it's so
smooth that it's quite literally
changing the game for myself and my team
without compromising on quality to find
out more all you have to do is search
bluejeans.com and let me know how you
get on
I'm in an interesting phase at the
moment in my fitness and health Journey
because because I'm training for soccer
Aid which takes place in June at Old
Trafford I've been training a lot
differently but regardless of how I
train regardless of whether I'm doing
strength training or cardiovascular
training which is predominantly what I'm
doing now I need this which is Hills
nutritionally complete protein product
the crazy thing about this which I
almost find hard to achieve is that it's
20 grams of protein you get 26 vitamins
and minerals and it's only roughly about
100 calories 105 calories and it tastes
like a dream The Salted Caramel one is
my favorite I've got the second favorite
option of mine in front of me which is
Vanilla Fudge both of them taste amazing
a little bit of ice in it it tastes like
a fantastic healthy milkshake
give it a try if you haven't already
this is actually next to RTD this is my
favorite product from heel try it love
it number one protein powder when we um
when we do fall out of quote-unquote
balance in some way when we maybe
don't have our priorities in order at
least this is what people think
people diagnose themselves with this
thing called burnout and I've been quite
intentional with my words there because
I have my own opinions on burnout I
don't really think burnout
is what people think it is people think
of burnout as basically doing too much
work I think most people 90 of people
would say that burnout is when you do
too much work
it's a big Topic in conversation now
this subject matter of burnout what do
you think burnout is so there's some
amazing research done by uh two British
researchers many of Stansfield and candy
and they concluded that a toxic work
environment
is not the work you do
it's the type of work you do
and so they wanted to see the the study
was what kind of work correlates with
increased rates of depression anxiety
disorders and they found two conditions
that raise the rates the kind of anxiety
and depression they literally the kind
of jobs that make you sick
psychologically and those two conditions
are high expectations coupled with low
control
coupled with exactly low control so high
expectations and low control if you have
high expectations and high control no
problem people rise to the occasion but
when you have a job with high
expectations and low control that's
burnout
why because it's a lack of agency I'm
expected to do all this and I can't
right I'm trying I'm trying I'm trying
but as much as I do my my I don't have
enough agency to meet these expectations
so let's zoom in on both of those and
really compelled by this idea of low
control
um when people think of control that
could mean a number of things is that
the ability to make decisions for myself
on how to accomplish the challenge to
affect the the outcome okay right so if
you have
um uh you know your your a small Cog in
a big machine but you have these very
high expectations but it doesn't all
depend on you there are other people
exactly no budgets circumstances beyond
your control that is hard no matter how
hard you work you can't meet
someone's expectations
why
I'm trying to think from this the
psychological discomfort framework why
that
that environment of high expectations
this being pulled this way but then
being suppressed on this end would cause
burnout and burnout I guess we have to
Define it as that what is it the sort of
psychological overwhelm which is giving
up which makes you give up yeah it's uh
I think it's because it's the
it's the definition of death
right schopenhauer describes life as
anything that tries to affect its
environment
life is defined by something that
affects its outside environment changes
where it is to its benefit in some way
that's what a live organism is so if you
cannot change your environment you
cannot change your circumstances it
feels like death and eventually you give
up it's uh you you learn helplessness
where eventually it's not worth
continuing to try because you can't
affect the outcomes
I've always thought of burnout as being
somewhat sort of intrinsically attached
to meaning and maybe that's it that's
exactly what you're describing there
because you're being robbed of your
ability to affect your outside
environment which maybe is what meaning
is meaning is I think the can be the
relief valve
so if you are toiling I mean you think
about the role of religion in in many
people's lives historically
religion tells you that even though your
lot in life may not change right
there was reward to come so you are you
have agency you have control it's just
that the reward is delayed so even if
your life is awful now someday it'll be
better
that's that gives you agency so that's
meaning right that gives you that that
meaning that purpose of it's coming
someday
but if you believe that there's nothing
you can do to get that reward that it
makes no difference uh then the only
logical thing to do is to quit I might
be totally wrong here but I I think the
reason I thought meaning was so
important was because I when you when
you think about people in roles that
typically feel that burnout it seemed to
me that it was like monotonous tedious
work where
you know maybe like working on a
production line where you're doing very
very long hours of work that is absent
of meaning for you you don't really care
about the work but you're being pressed
to do long hours
so that was my kind of understanding of
it because I tried to contrast it to
areas where I never get burned out you
know watching Manchester United play or
playing video games whatever and I
thought what's the difference well it's
because of my sort of subjective meaning
or enjoyment of the task so I thought
the enjoyment and the meaning part was
Central somehow to but becoming burnt
out um
uh I don't know I'm not sure if it's
necessarily uh requires meaning per se I
mean you see people working
two three jobs uh sometimes you know
when they're getting started from base
level just to feed their kids
um it's like they can do very repetitive
boring work and they do it uh because
they are affecting change they have
agency they can see the results they
need to feed their families
and this idea of an agency in control is
fundamentally linked to our physio
physiological Health as well which I
find quite surprising that people that
have greater degrees of control in their
professional Endeavors are healthier
right this concept of locus of control
right where it's external locus of
control versus internal locus of control
or people who have external locus of
control believe that things happen to
them people who have internal locus of
control believe that they affect change
and what's fascinating about this is
that uh people who have internal locus
of control on every metric of well-being
do better they're wealthier they have
more they have better relationships
they're healthier every metric of
well-being having an internal locus of
control benefits you even when your
circumstances dictate that you shouldn't
think that you had that much control
even when you're in a really awful
situation believing you have agency
makes you better off even if it's not
true
because that mindset again back to what
we were saying earlier about how mindset
affects what we do if you believe
willpower is limited you will act as
such right I used to come home uh after
a long day of work and say oh you know
what I've had a hard day uh I don't have
any more willpower my willpower's been
exhausted like we talked about earlier
give me that pint of Ben and Jerry's I'm
gonna sit on the couch and eat my ice
cream
because I believed I I was spent right
but it was in my head whereas people who
believe that they have agency they do
have control live much healthier Better
Lives this raises the point of our
responsibility which is quite a
controversial point for some reason
funny that that is right why is it so
controversial do you think I think it's
this this idea rightfully so of not
victim blaming but I don't think that
that is incongruous that you don't have
to blame victims
as well as saying that we should take as
much responsibility as we possibly can
um so in my line of work you know I I'm
fairly controversial because I wrote
hooked how to build habit-forming
products and then I wrote indistractible
about how to control your attention and
choose your life and many people see
those as as opposites right but I didn't
write hooked and unhooked I wrote
indistractible Because it's about having
our cake and eating it too it's about
having both we can have the best of both
worlds that we can build apps we can
build technologies that help us exercise
and learn new languages and and stay
healthy we can use these these amazing
Technologies for good but we can also
find ways to not get distracted from the
from the devices or whatever the
distraction might be that lead us away
from what we really want
um but yeah sometimes people will say
yeah but that's uh you know you're
you're blaming the victim here that
we're all victims of these Technologies
the technology companies are doing it to
us right the social dilemma movie tells
us that our brains are being hijacked
and uh they interviewed me for the
social dilemma movie did you see it by
the way I did yeah okay so they
interviewed me and I know you've had
Johan Hari on the show and I have big
issues with with his whole thesis
because it's a line around
it's not your fault it's being done to
you and look there is no doubt that
these companies design their products to
be engaging that's the point right do we
want hey Netflix stop making your show
so interesting uh uh Apple your phones
are too user friendly right that's
ridiculous that's the point of these
products we want them to be engaging we
pay for the privilege of having them be
engaging so it's ridiculous to think
that somehow they're going to stop doing
that uh it's also ridiculous to think
that the government and all its
brilliant wisdom is going to figure out
how to regulate these companies properly
right we see every time I come to Europe
I can't use the internet because these
stupid gdpr rules that I have to
constantly click acceptance I don't even
know what I'm clicking on they're so
annoying we see what happens when
government tries to regulate these
companies most of the time they're
incredibly ham-fisted so do we just sit
here I'm not I'm not saying I'm
anti-regulation I'm for smart regulation
but in the meantime what are we doing
we're just gonna sit here and wait right
please Zuckerberg stop addicting me it's
ridiculous there's so much we can do
starting with not thinking we're
powerless in all Realms of our life
again even when circumstances are beyond
your control it benefits you it behooves
you to believe you do have agency you do
have control you're going to be better
off as opposed to saying well there's
nothing I can do because what do people
do when they believe they're powerless
correct nothing yeah
it's so interesting because I had a
conversation with a friend of mine last
night who
um is single been single for a while and
we were we were huddled around there was
a couple of us and everyone was single
um in the circle I'm I'm currently not
single
um and
I saw some of that I saw some of that
well it's just it's the nature of the
modern dating world right you know like
you hear a lot I don't want to be on
these dating apps and social media
doesn't work and I can't meet anybody so
it's just the way it is and you can see
in that moment like
it's almost like declaring defeat well
there is agency in that as well remember
if life is defined by something that
changes is outside environment that's a
great way to say well I have agency I
decide to quit it's in my control
to to say it's it's impossible
I guess so even if it is self-defeating
it it feels good to say it's impossible
but it's going to reduce your chances of
finding something of course if you just
say okay well I can't and you blame
accidental factors right on that the
Mark Zuckerberg has become a villain in
society you know people have really
portrayed him as being the source of so
much evil destroy people's mental health
because of these apps and all of these
kinds of things
I sense you have a slightly different
approach to that or you think that's a
little bit too simplified am I right
which part the the kind of I saw
something yesterday where Mark
Zuckerberg was playing Jiu Jitsu have
you ever played yeah I saw the video you
should say playing Jujitsu he was doing
Jiu Jitsu do you see the video yeah and
like the top
the person who would quote retweeted it
had said he's destroyed our generation's
mental health but he's pretty good at
jiu jitsu
you know he has been attacked for the
last decade yeah um because people think
that you know he bought these apps and
these apps have now made our lives
significantly worse but the framing that
you present seems to say
if it wasn't those apps it would be
something else and it's not necessarily
the apps itself it's our relationship to
the apps because of emotional regulation
in other parts of our life you said
something super interesting earlier
which we kind of moved on from where you
said that you don't believe
um
you believe that the
apps are a symptom of
a wider social issue is that is an
accurate representation of your views
yeah yeah I mean I think look I'm not uh
saying these companies are guilt-free by
the way I have been asked many times to
work for them and with them and I I
always refuse because I don't want any
conflict or appearance of conflict of
interest so I don't have any I don't get
paid by these companies in any way but I
think there is absolutely a moral Panic
around social media we already see it
now fading right it was last week it was
uh social media this week it's going to
be AI there's always a moral panic and
if you look back at the the history of
mankind we have always had moral panics
of one thing or another uh especially
with media uh media that hijacks the
brain of of a population that's always
been a big fear I think uh in general
it's it's way overblown I mean if you
actually look at the research uh in
terms of of the effects of mental health
um look overuse of any media is going to
have deleterious consequences right when
my daughter was into Harry Potter and
she was reading Harry Potter five hours
a day I say hey honey that's too much
Harry Potter right like that's gonna
have some diligars consequence as well
you need to go outside you need to see
your friends you do other things so yeah
any extremes uh are bad now I do think
there is room
for regulation for two protected classes
of people one we currently protect which
is children so children you know there's
my daughter can't walk into a casino and
start playing blackjacks you can't walk
into a bar and Order gin and Tony she's
too young for that right so there's
certain protections for children I think
we should have those protections for
social media I think 13 is probably too
young the current regulation at least in
the states is 13. that's probably too
young
the other group of people who don't have
protection who need protection are
pathological addicts so addiction you
know we toss around this word Addiction
so much these days uh my my wife got a a
box of shoes from DSW and the the box
says danger
addictive contents inside okay it's
shoes right but we use this word
Addiction we throw it around addiction
is a disease it's a pathology and just
because something is addictive doesn't
mean addicts everyone clearly right many
of us have a glass of wine with dinner
we're not all alcoholics we have sex
we're not all sex addicts right so it's
ridiculous to think just because
something is addictive to some people
it's addictive to everyone but if you
are addicted and the company knows this
might be the case and I've been
advocating this for years this is the
kind of legislation I do support then I
think the government then the company
has a responsibility right if an alcohol
company
they don't know who's addicted how would
they know how would they know who the
alcoholics are they wouldn't know
the online companies they do know they
have personal identifiable information
and they know your time on site
so they could reach out and this is what
I'm advocating for I call it a use and
abuse policy that if you are using this
product give me a number 30 hours a week
40 hours a week whatever number is in
the you know several standard deviations
of of use we're going to reach out to
you with a very respectful message that
says we see that you are using your pro
our product in a way that may indicate
you are struggling with an addiction can
we help can we help right very
respectful if they say no fine right but
offer to help can we uh help you use uh
blocking tools so that you're you know
yourself select out uh well here are
resources I think you have a
responsibility now that's about three to
five percent of the population that
struggles with addiction the problem is
there's this popular narrative and a lot
of people are selling a lot of books
telling us that uh our attention is
being stolen
right stolen from us
if you're addicted you could argue that
that pathology of addiction okay
everybody else if you're not a child or
you're not addicted this is a personal
responsibility issue it's not an
addiction it's a distraction but we
don't want to call it that
right because if it's a distraction ah I
gotta do something about it that's no
fun can't I just blame Zuckerberg no I
gotta take some personal responsibility
you know what I I have to learn how to
manage my internal triggers I have to
schedule my time I have to hack back
these external triggers I got to put in
some packs in place this is not hard
stuff folks right the book isn't that
long thinking maybe an hour and a half
two hours to read it and you will be
indistractable you'll look it back at
this and think this is a joke we were
complaining about this being addictive
come on it's a few simple techniques
right so to sit here and complain say
our attention is being stolen our focus
is being stolen it's not being stolen
we're giving it away
give me a break we're just not stolen we
are willfully giving it away because
we're not doing anything about it so I
think yes is there room for regulation
of course I think there's a lot we can
do but let's start with personal
responsibility that's the first line of
defense wouldn't that make sense first
let's see what we can do and then we can
also figure out uh while the politicians
figured out we can you know find ways to
regulate as well
one of the things I found compelling was
the role that our psychological trauma
and our childhood trauma can have on us
because
one of the psychologists I sat here with
described as
Gremlins and goblins he said sir Steve
Steve Peter said that we have some of us
have goblins these are the hard to move
hard to budge traumas usually happen
below the age of 10. that will just stay
with us the whole time you know like
really severe traumas and then after
that generally speaking their Gremlins
where you can do work to kind of
overcome them
when people are thinking about taking
those steps in relationships or in a gym
or whatever you know you talked about
obesity being clinically obese sometimes
we have these goblins at the heart of us
that limit us from taking that first
step that just act as a gravitational
force against the behavior we want to
take right how do we can we overcome
that is that is it relevant well it's a
severe trauma is kind of out of scope
for for what I work on but I would say
for the Goblins as you describe them
that is where I think it is very helpful
to realize that they're just feelings
they're just feelings right they're but
feelings can be very convincing but
feelings don't happen to us that happen
for us so if we can leverage that if we
can learn from that if we can use it
like Rocket Fuel to propel us towards
what we want to do if you look at you
know amazing artists or athletes
it's interesting how many of them have
some kind of trauma
right have you ever noticed that like
they're they're they're running away
from something just as much as they're
running towards something they're trying
to prove something to their their
alcoholic father they're trying to uh
prove something to to somebody because
of what happened to them so you know we
have post-traumatic stress we also have
post-traumatic growth depending on how
we frame that and what we do with that
discomfort there's a lot of people who
do amazing things driven by these same
goblins that other people run away from
it's about how we reframe that uh that
discomfort every successful person
outside here in fact the last person
that sat in the chair said I asked them
and they said they were basically
running away from
um their trauma and actually they
actually got diagnosed many years later
in therapy with post-traumatic stress
disorder PTSD they are the number one in
their industry I'd say right I mean it's
it's so common and many of the people I
interviewed for the book they that was
what was so fascinating it wasn't trauma
or trauma free everybody has trauma and
from these high performers they all had
it uh something and we all do in some
way we've all suffered in one way or
another and and of course there's you
know it's very difficult it's very
touchy but uh you know it's very much
subjective to us how we deal with it how
we will grow from it uh I think that's
the big lesson I think uh the psychology
Community as well we'll we'll teach that
it's about learning how to deal with
that discomfort in a way that is
adaptive right as opposed to maladaptive
something that hurts you that these
experiences are neutral it's how we
interpret them that matters that's a
really key point that I've learned from
doing what I do here the point about
trauma being neutral it's a subjective
thing you know someone snatches a toy
off you and you're a kid
now you might interpret that as being a
fun game or you might interpret it as I
can't trust anybody
and it's like it's the same incident but
it's interpreted in two entirely
different ways and then that child might
then go on to be incredibly successful
because they were low in trust right you
know but that might hurt their personal
relationships and the other child who
had the same thing happen to them might
just be you know
and it's it's not only psychologically
true but also physiologically true I
don't know if you've read uh Mind Body
prescription uh it's an old book but it
basically is is a lot of people read it
for back pain it's incredible I had a um
my last my last company uh business
partner of mine
she would be on the floor in pain in the
middle of the day she would have to go
to a back office because she just could
not move she was in so much pain
and uh her husband had incredible carpal
tunnel he would wear all kinds of
devices and uh you know stuff to try and
immobilize his hands and he really
suffered and then they came across this
book the mind-body prescription which
basically talks about how you don't want
to uh stop doing the painful actions
that most pain is chronic type pain
after the healing has occurred of course
as a window right if if you still have
pain I think what is it six months if
you still have pain then it's called
chronic pain
that the body has already healed within
that time period we're sure the body is
healed why is there still pain that
there isn't necessarily pain does not
mean physical trauma per se and I think
this is relevant to psychological trauma
as well the pain happens because we
focus on our attention on the pain you
can't have pain without attention do you
notice that you can't have pain without
attention uh so it there's these cases
by the way of in the world war one where
soldiers would drag their buddies to the
medic
and say medic you know my buddy's dying
you need to help him and the medic would
look at the soldier and say soldier your
arm is gone and look and you wouldn't
notice that half his arm is missing
because pain requires attention so when
we over focus on our pain when all we
pay attention to is our pain and I'm
saying here physiologically as well as
psychologically the pain becomes worse
the pain becomes worse when we say and
and more so when we try and not do the
thing that caused us pain so now the
advice
is not you know if you have a back pain
issue it used to be okay well immobilize
don't move uh you know don't stretch
don't just you know rest rest and now
the advice is really changing same with
carpal tunnel it's not you know get all
the wrist braces and don't move your
wrists it's the opposite if you feel
back pain do whatever caused that pain
three times
because you want to regulate the the
brain to learn that this is not a threat
again emotions pain don't happen to us
they happen for us it's a it's a lesson
for us to learn from it's just a signal
now we can interpret that signal any way
we want so when we hyper focus on
something that was painful
physiologically or psychologically when
we don't do the thing that causes
discomfort right when we want to go to
Safe spaces with trigger warnings and
we're not exposed to the things that
make us uncomfortable that only makes it
worse and worse and worse because we're
paying more attention to it and we don't
have the exposure we we know the the way
to treat phobias how do you treat a
phobia exposure therapy right so when
someone's scared scared of a dog right
when someone has severe uh reaction to a
dog what do you do well first you show
them a picture of a puppy then you show
them a picture of a full-grown dog then
you show them a video then eventually
you put them in a room with the puppy
out the other side of the room 20 feet
away then you you expose them to the
threat until their brain down regulates
and
teaches itself Not to cause this
reaction this emotional reaction to this
potential stressor and so it's the same
way with many of the the potential
discomforts in our life isn't it the
same way with just belief itself like
self-belief you think about how our
beliefs form people always you know ask
me questions and one of the most popular
questions anyone wants to know in the
sort of self-development community is
about how we become confident and
confidence is a belief and one of the
ways that I've become confident in my
life is by exposure therapy I guess yeah
you know how you learn to speak on a
stage is by doing it like there's no
other you can't read a book on it to get
it overcome the nerves
um have you thought much about
confidence and the role it plays in
everything we've discussed today and how
to build confidence funny you should say
uh getting on stage so uh I'm a
professional public speaker let's let's
do that a lot good shows thank you very
good well okay well let me back up a few
years so when I when I first started out
I wrote the book first and then I
started speaking about it and when I
would get on stage I would have
incredible stage fright
and at first this is with my first book
hooked and uh I would tell myself this
this script of when I felt my heartbeat
when I would get you know sweaty pits
and I get very nervous
and I tell myself I can actually it's
funny just talking about I can actually
feel it uh I would tell myself you know
if I was a real public speaker I
wouldn't feel this way I'm gonna mess up
I'm gonna stumble over my words I'm
gonna fall flat and people are gonna
laugh at me
and I would do worse on stage and then
when I started researching
indistractible I found this technique
called reimagining the trigger and
reimagining the trigger is when we take
the same exact physiological reactions
and we reinterpret them so now when I go
on stage and I feel my heart racing I
don't use the old script I have a new
script the new script says my heart is
beating fast because it is pumping
oxygen to my brain so I can deliver the
best possible talk
that's where confidence comes from is
reframing the triggers what used to
scare you should embolden you should
strengthen you someone that's low
confidence what are they are they
lacking in something are they are they
lacking in positive evidence or are they
abundant in negative evidence I guess it
can be either
hmm I think they're stuck to a script
okay I mean this is why we see uh Mike
and Michael polin's book how to change a
mind where why psychedelics are so
interesting for for treatment of
depression anxiety in various conditions
it's not the drug itself right there's
no healing taking even the whole concept
of the broken brain and uh uh chemical
imbal you know this whole chemical
imbalance theories turns out it's
rubbish nobody believes that anyone in
Psychology Community it's only the
public that thinks that there's a brain
chemical imbalance
it's not being it's not fixing anything
in the brain it's simply showing you
that a different perspective exists
that's all it does it simply shows you
that a different perspective exists and
that can snap you out of this what we
call a trapped prior a trap belief
around how things are and says wait a
minute I don't have to think that way
so when it comes to confidence I mean
what do actors do actors inhabit
completely different characters
uh On Demand right and that's that's a
skill I think
we could try on for size we should
actually once in a while say well what
what would it be like if I acted
different right do I have to stick to my
obelis no there's no law that says you
have to act the same way every day it's
simply that our our sense of self our
our self-image is based on what we did
previously a topic that's actually
emerged a lot in public Consciousness
and conversation since we last spoke is
and it's very much linked to all the
work you do
is attention deficit disorder he wrote a
book about not being distracted
what's your thoughts on ADHD add oh this
is a big topic and I'm probably gonna
get myself in trouble here but um let me
start by saying it is not up to me uh or
anyone you would listen to on a podcast
to tell you whether you have or don't
have a diagnosis go to a physician and
and get a diagnosis one way or the other
I will say that I think
um
There's Something Fishy going on when it
comes to ADHD I have a lot of concerns
one
the discrepancy between what's happening
in the states and in Europe
is weird right 10 of children in the
United States are diagnosed with ADHD in
Europe it's one percent
something strange there right there's
something about the culture of the
United States
that I believe over diagnosis and it
over diagnoses because I don't think
there's a great check and balance
to disincentivize the diagnosis
meaning if a teacher says
uh this child
is a pain this child can't sit still and
we're talking about you know many times
five six seven year olds where
it's funny I I I a lot of people say how
technology is this and technology is
that you know public education is also a
technology it's only about 150 years old
it's not that old we haven't done it for
that long and so there are negative
repercussions also to putting a bunch of
kids in a in a box and expecting them to
sit still and be quiet and listen to
some boring person lecturing on on the
front of the classroom
so I think there's a there's a clear
incentive for teachers and parents to
try and calm kids down
and I don't I don't know if there's
enough of a check and balance to say
look is this is this really necessary to
diagnose especially when
there are Pharmaceuticals involved so I
like to repeat and I'll repeat it again
and again skills before pills
skills before pills ADHD is real he's
diagnosed and for many people medication
is the appropriate course of action but
I have talked to so many people in the
field who just don't have the resources
to teach skills and so all they can do
is prescribe and it's the first thing
they'll do the kid will get diagnosed
here's here's some pills and I think
those pills we do not properly
um weight how dangerous those pills can
be not only look these you know these
things are amphetamines right they have
consequences they have uh side effects
and many times we will give pills to
take care of the side effects of the
pills we just diagnosed
and more importantly they are training a
generation to believe that Solutions
come in pill bottles and I think that
has some very severe potential
consequences
especially when for many many people
adults and children the skills are here
right if you have tried
the skills and they still don't work if
you've taken you know a day or two just
a day or two to learn some of the skills
that I talk about indestructible and
then if you find you know what it's
still not working okay got it but to
jump straight to the Pharmaceuticals I
think is a big mistake because they all
come with with side effects so skills
before pills
the justification that I got from one of
my my friends that was diagnosed um was
that his brain doesn't make enough
dopamine
that's not true
there's we don't know that that's uh
that's pure conjecture this science
doesn't support that we the whole
chemical imbalance Theory no
psychiatrist will tell you that's true
it doesn't that's just scientifically
false where did that come from it came
there were it was a theory that has
since been discredited
with with further research we we
actually you cannot find ADHD in the
brain there's no brain scan to say
there's no blood test you go to a doctor
they will ask you questions you'll take
a little assessment and then if you get
whatever it is six out of eight of these
criteria uh by the way very gamble
completely gamable
um you'll get a diagnosis and of course
many Physicians
unfortunately
will cater to what they think the
patients want because they don't want a
bad review on Google that says this
doctor didn't believe me right so they
they're they fear a bad review and
they'll they'll do what the patient
wants furthermore I think a big problem
okay again
this isn't black and white
I'm I'm very much for a proper diagnosis
I'm sure that ADHD is absolutely
absolutely real let me say that again
but if you go to a physician that does
not also give you
an undiagnosis plan everybody thinks
about diagnosis what about undiagnosis
right when you go to the doctor and you
have a broken arm
they put on a cast and they say come
back in a few weeks we'll take the cast
off and you'll be healed
where's the undiagnosis planned for ADHD
it should exist it should exist we
should be able to help people overcome
and we see this all the time when people
want to I I in my family I've seen this
people in my family have been diagnosed
with ADHD
they go on medication they suffer from
the consequences of the of the some of
the side effects they go off the pills
then they get to the skills they learn
the skills
and they functionally don't have it
anymore remember it is not I I what I
hate about uh a lot of people in the
ADHD Community they feel like it's an
identity
right it is who they are and that is so
dangerous
we need to look at ADHD as something
that is treatable
okay it's treatable sometimes through
medication it's treatable through
behavioral practices we can learn to
overcome many of these things because if
it's not functionally hurting you you
shouldn't have a diagnosis anymore but
for you know I think if if you go to a
physician that doesn't give you some
kind of undiagnosis plan which could
take years it's not an instant solution
but there needs to be some kind of plan
to how do we make sure that this
functionally doesn't debilitate you uh
without you know medication as as a
constant course of treatment especially
when it has side effects that's a big
red flag
the treatment is based on what people
believe the cause is so if I if I think
the cause is a chemical imbalance or
your brain is broken in some way
I can't create an undiagnosis plan
right that's the problem
it's not look people are cured of
addiction addiction is a pathology you
have it for a while while your circuit
so addiction is a Confluence of three
things the person the pain they're going
through and the product that they are
addicted to but when any of those three
things change they're no longer addicted
I don't believe in this I'm an addict
for life I think that's incredibly
harmful and oh you will be very
hard-pressed to find someone who's in
the addiction treatment Community who
calls people addicts we don't call them
addicts anymore we call them people
struggling with addiction because we
don't want to stigmatize them to believe
that's who I am what people do when they
have an identity they conform to that
identity that's that's terrible you
struggle with an addiction for a while
and then you are treated and then you
recover why do we think that ADHD would
be any different
the BBC wrote an article this week which
is what spiral sort of causes this
discussion amongst my my close friends
with the BBC said they were they kind of
presented the the idea that Tick Tock
had been really driving and over
diagnosis because on Tick Tock you'll
see a lot of videos that say things like
you know if you have this problem this
problem you can't focus on this where
you like lose your keys a lot and you
forget what you've put them
that's ADH that's ADHD it's kind of
simplified the the ailment
um
and the BBC wrote this piece sort of
saying that is it driving an
over-diagnosis in culture
um
and I've seen I mean if I go on if I go
on my social media that's what I see I
see so much content around saying well
if you've got this this and this if
you've got this habit then that's ADHD
and that does concern me a little bit
because we both know that ADHD is a very
real thing that can be debilitating for
people that suffer with it um but
trivializing it into small small little
right and it's and if you look for it
right it's recency bias when you are
looking for something you'll find it so
if you you know do do do people who
everyone who loses their keys from time
to time have ADHD of course not but if
you're looking for and you say Okay I I
lost my keys it must be this or you know
I was having difficulty reading a book
it must be this when that's repeated ad
nauseum in the popular press we I think
that's part of the demo whether whether
the if the media is Tick Tock or
traditional media uh there has been
um I I think a popularization of the
diagnosis and the more people hear about
the diagnosis the more they potentially
will look for it I think we I think the
pendulum should swing the other way now
I don't think there's anything wrong
with teaching the skills that could make
ADHD functionally not a problem but
what's wrong with that there's no
problem I think the problem comes in
when we a uh get people to identify you
know we hear this all the time you say
oh I have undiagnosed ADHD well you
haven't you haven't gone to the doctor
you haven't taken any kind of assessment
how do you know right and even then if
you did want there's also okay there's
some gray area there too or people say
oh I'm so OCD OCD is a is a terrible
pathology right it's not uh I like to
wash my hands more than others I like to
keep my room clean no no that is a
serious pathology so when we addiction I
think is probably the most overused
phrase addiction is a terrible pathology
but when people say I'm addicted to this
I'm addicted to that it has two terrible
consequences one it's I think great
offensive to people who actually
struggle with this disease of addiction
that's one big problem or the pathology
of addiction
two you are
you are creating this identity for
yourself as someone who is powerless
addiction the word Addiction comes from
addictio in Latin which means slave so
you're a slave to something so when you
call yourself a slave to something
you're basically saying you're you're
Palace against it so using these these
medicalized terms and moralizing these
terms I think is a really bad path who
stands to gain from this I I've sat here
with so many Health experts and they
tell me about the sugar industry and the
smoking industry that you know Pub
published a lot of sort of media back in
the day saying that sugar was good for
us and cigarettes were good for us and
and I think about this um this
conversation around ADHD now who who
stands to gain from an increased
diagnosis of people with ADHD well I
don't want it to sound like the tobacco
industry that you know was sitting in
smoke-filled rooms plotting but there
are systems in place which benefit some
groups over others for sure I mean the
the I think the
psychology industry the pharmaceutical
industry benefits quite a bit again I
don't think they're sitting there
thinking oh we're gonna convince people
that there's uh that they should be
diagnosed but of course there's
incentives
and and more importantly there's no
disincentives I'm not I'm not so worried
about the incentives I don't think
there's I'm not pointing fingers at
unethical practices uh in Psychiatry or
in the pharmaceutical industry per se
what I'm worried about is where are the
disincentives who is saying you're
diagnosing too many people here it can't
be that 10 of American children have
ADHD how can that be something fishy
going on where where are the breaks who
says
this doesn't seem right
what's that what's the most important
thing you think we haven't talked about
today that we should have talked about
so we didn't talk about how to build an
indestructible workplace oh okay yeah I
read I read a stat that you tweeted a
couple of years ago that said
um nurses had managed to reduce the rate
of
mistakes when they're giving
subscriptions by like 80 just by wearing
like a vest that said do not disturb me
right exactly the Staggering so that's
where I got the idea of that uh that
screen sign that comes in every copy of
the book is so these nurses uh in the UK
actually uh
this huge problem of prescription
mistakes that patients were being
prescribed the wrong medication or the
wrong dosage of medication it turns out
that in almost all cases it was caused
by a distraction they were you know on
their dosing rounds and somebody would
tap them on their shoulder and disrupt
them and then they would make mistakes
and the solution was that they had these
nurses wear these bright red vests that
says drug round in progress do not
disturb and they reduce the percentage
of prescription Mistakes by 88 they
almost eliminated the problem
and so I tell the story I know that you
know not everybody who reads the book is
in the medical profession but I tell the
story to illustrate one how we too don't
realize the problem is happening until
it's too late right we think we're doing
our job we're doing great everything's
fine and just like these nurses and not
until they came back to work the next
day did they realize hey did you realize
you gave Mr Johnson the wrong medication
you almost killed the man right in that
case they got that immediate feedback
and it's awful life-threatening for us
we don't realize how much better we
could be at our jobs or at life when we
work with that distraction the when I I
did there's a whole section of the book
on uh building an indestructible
workplace
we found that there's three
characteristics of an indestructible
workplace the first is that there is a
uh a play Sorry a sense of psychological
safety this comes from the work of Amy
Edmondson and at Harvard and she's
identified that psychological safety is
this ability to talk about your problems
without fear of Retribution so if you
can't raise your hand and talk about the
problem of distraction hey boss you know
I I'm really having trouble finishing my
work because I constantly feel I am
interrupted if you can't talk about that
problem that is the problem it's not the
technology it's that you can't talk
about the problem so number one trait
psychological safety the ability to talk
about the problem second is a forum to
talk about the problem so a little
sidebar
slack was one of these products that a
lot of people complained about when I
was researching the book and I said you
know what do you find most distracting
and slack kept coming up or other group
messaging services but slack uh is the
biggest or was the biggest at the time
and uh so I went to visit slack I went
to slack headquarters in San Francisco
and I expected
if slack is this super distracting
technology well nobody uses slack more
than slack I expected to see an office
full of people who were constantly
distracted
but that's not what I found at all that
at Slack
the parking lot clears out at 6 pm and
if you use slack on nights and weekends
you are reprimanded you are told that is
not what we do at our company right and
what I found was that they exemplified
these these traits those other another
company I profile in the book but slack
is one of them so they have
psychological safety they give people a
form that's the second trait they give
people a forum to talk about the problem
and so they created slack channels where
people it was called beef tweets they
had a slack Channel where people could
post complaints or suggestions about the
company
and so what was important about this as
a practice it doesn't have to be on
slack some companies I profile Boston
Consulting Group as well they had a
massive turnaround as well when it comes
to their company culture they went from
one of the hardest places to work it was
my first job out of college it was
really rough from a work-life balance
perspective to now it's one of the best
places to work according to uh they got
an award for one of the best places to
work in America
uh and they did that by creating a forum
by creating a place to talk about the
problem so slack has a slack Channel
where people can talk about things that
they want to improve of the company and
the important thing here is not that
everything has to be acted upon right
management can decide what's important
what's not important but employees need
to be seen so what does slack management
do in order to make sure that people
felt heard they would use Emoji
they would send like if somebody had a
complaint they would post the eye Emoji
to show them okay we saw that or the
check Emoji to show them it's been taken
care of right so it's a form for people
to talk about the problem and feel like
they're heard
the third trait and the most important
is that management needs to exemplify
what it means to be indestructible so
when you walk into slack headquarters
there's a huge pink neon sign I also
have a picture of it in the book a huge
pink neon sign in the company canteen
that says work hard and go home
it's part of the company ethos that
people do their best work when they're
fully focused and then after work they
need time to be with their families to
do other things so and that's that was
part of the company culture so
psychological safety a form to talk
about these problems and making sure
that management exemplifies what it
means to be indistractable
so much of that I'm going to implement
and here we have a closing tradition on
this podcast where the last guest leaves
a question for the next guest not
knowing who they're leaving a question
before it's a new tradition since you
last came on and the question that's
been left for you is what is one idea
that is important that most people would
disagree with you on that you feel needs
to be said oh the Peter teal question
okay you asked me what I changed my mind
on uh and I mentioned it a few times in
passing but I've really changed my mind
on uh the importance of religion in that
I'm I'm secular I don't believe in
anything Supernatural but uh
I think we as
Skeptics I would say to describe us
whether you call yourself agnostic or
atheist or whatever we get we give up a
lot we give up a lot and I've changed my
mind on
um the fact that
organized religion
has a lot to offer us and and this is
something I'm really struggling with
because I have such a problem with
accepting the supernatural elements of
religion
but the benefits are amazing right
taking care of people
who uh
you may not know directly but are part
of your community having a place to go
to that you know you will be taken care
of as well having rituals that Mark the
year
um higher purpose higher purpose uh
forced disconnection and reflection
meditation prayer
there's so many things I think we miss
out on that I've I've I have a newfound
respect for the benefits I think a lot
of a lot of people get stuck with you
but I can't believe the Hocus Pocus
right to write the writingly said
but we miss a lot and I think we we
should acknowledge that thank you for
writing such a great book thank you for
coming back onto the podcast
um you're an incredible person and I
can't wait to buy whatever you write
next I appreciate that so much it's a
huge honor thank you so much thank you
ladies and gentlemen our newest brand
partnership will come is no surprise to
regular listeners on this podcast the
first episode of 2023 I was joined by
the incredible Professor Tim Spector to
hear more about his work at a company
called Zoe using data to understand our
bodies better so that we can live more
fulfilled higher potential lives Zoe was
born from the truth that our overall
health is impacted by our gut health by
helping you to understand how your body
is working so he can help you to reduce
your risk of long-term disease and
increase your energy levels for me this
is the future and that is why I became
an investor in the company and that is
why they are now a sponsor of this
podcast you can read up about everything
they're doing and you can pre-order your
Zoe program at joinzoe.com
and they've been kind enough to offer an
exclusive 10 off code CEO 10. so you can
put that code in at checkout
ceo10 you got to the end of this podcast
whenever someone gets to the end of this
podcast I feel like I owe them a greater
debt of gratitude because that means you
listen to the whole thing and hopefully
that suggests that you enjoyed it if you
are at the end and you enjoyed this
podcast could you do me a little bit of
a favor and hit that subscribe button
that's one of the clearest indicators we
have that this episode was a good
episode and we look at that on all of
the episodes to see which episodes
generated the most subscribers
thank you so much and I'll see you again
next time
[Music]